---
title: Git - Stashing (annex)
date: 2014-06-04 18:12 UTC
tags: programming, git
author: svankmajer
---

You all know about good ol' `git-stash`. If you happen to don't know about it, don't worry and, please, fearlessly run:

`$ man git-stash`

No sweat. It might be the only intelligible Git man page of all Git man pages.
But today's post highlights something that doesn't appear in this man page and
I that didn't know until minutes ago. I thought it might be cool to share it.

READMORE

Essentially, `git-stash` lets you save the current state of your working directory away and enjoy a pristine working directory that points to `HEAD` 
afterwards. Those stashed local modifications can be listed, inspected and applied on top of a particular commit. They are stored in `refs/stash` and they
can be referenced using standard reflog syntax, e.g. `stash{0}` for the last saved stash, `stash{1}` for the previous. `stash{2.hours.ago}` is also possible. Slick. 

So, for example, if you want to inspect the penultimate stash, you go like this:

`$ git stash show -p stash@{1}`

To get something along the lines of:

```
diff --git a/source.rb b/source.rb
index e69de29..a5c8076 100644
--- a/index.html
+++ b/index.html
@@ -0,0 +1 @@
+An important diff.
```

Nothing particularly esoteric here.

Unfortunately, though, it seems that **you can't see the diffstat for stashed untracked files** going like that. If you stashed untracked files with 
`git stash -u` along with other local changes, running `git stash show -p stash@{n}` won't show any pleasant results. What the heck? 

Turns out that what happens is not documented anywhere but can be inferred 
[by looking at the commit that introduced the -u functionality](https://github.com/git/git/commit/787513027a7d0af3c2cd2f04b85bc7136d580586)... or by running
`git log --graph stash@{0}` that prints out something like this:

```
*-.   commit 3dac63a4f4c0db4167b1f73699ed15ed6f0e9189
|\ \  Merge: 01adf14 7e6b4ff feab0b4
| | | Author: svankmajer <svankmajer@svankmajer.net>
| | | Date:   Wed Jun 4 16:09:03 2014 -0300
| | | 
| | |     WIP on master: 01adf14 Initial commit.
| | |    
| | * commit feab0b459862a383886a4b746f1827dd4630fb2d
| |   Author: svankmajer <svankmajer@svankmajer.net>
| |   Date:   Wed Jun 4 16:09:03 2014 -0300
| |   
| |       untracked files on master: 01adf14 Initial commit.
| |   
| * commit 7e6b4fff39516454ceb2fef244ce5db6ed6f4aca
|/  Author: svankmajer <svankmajer@svankmajer.net>
|   Date:   Wed Jun 4 16:09:03 2014 -0300
|   
|       index on master: 01adf14 Initial commit.
|  
* commit 01adf14673212f4bdab771eb11b2f42f84e57df3
  Author: svankmajer <svankmajer@svankmajer.net>
    Date:   Wed Jun 4 16:08:26 2014 -0300
      
            Initial commit.
```

Investigating a little bit on StackOverflow, I learned that **untracked files are stored in the third parent of a stash commit**. Yes, stash@{0} has three 
parents. The first parent was the HEAD of the tree at the moment of `git stash save`. The second parent stores the state of the index. The third parent 
stores the state of the untracked files in the working directory. This means that you can see the untracked part of the last stash doing:

`$ git show stash@{0}^3`

You can also see the untracked file in the tree doing (notice the colon at the end):

`$ git show stash@{0}^3:`

I'm still sad that there isn't a nice way to summarize the differences between staged, unstaged and untracked vs. actual state. Now I know that this is
due partly to the way stashes are re-applied. But oh well, there is nothing stopping me from creating the difftool of my dreams.

Maybe I will.
